In Fig. 16, let PP′ be the plane of vibration of the polarizer, and A′A the plane of vibration of the analyzer. All the light, after it has passed through the polarizer, is vibrating parallel to PP′ when it reaches the lower side of the transparent crystal, cdef, on the stage of the microscope. In this transparent section let ob and oa be the two directions of vibration, i. e., the only two directions parallel to which rays of light can vibrate in passing through the section.

Let om represent the amplitude of vibration of a ray from the polarizer. When this ray reaches the section it cannot get through it vibrating in the direction om, but is doubly refracted and of the two resulting rays, one gets through vibrating in the direction ob and the other vibrating in the direction oa. From m draw perpendiculars 28to ob and oa. Then according to the law of the parallelogram of forces ob will represent the amplitude of vibration of the ray passing through the crystal vibrating in the direction ob, and oa will represent the amplitude of vibration of the ray passing through the crystal vibrating in the direction oa. We will thus have two rays passing through the crystal, polarized at right angles to each other.

Fig. 17.

Consider now the general question of the transmission of the doubly refracted rays through a plate. Whatever the angle of the parallel incident rays, each ray as AB, Fig. 17, is resolved, as just described, into two rays BC and BD, polarized at right angles to each other and following (usually) different paths in the plate. On emergence these follow parallel paths. Among the incident rays there are rays EG and FH, such that one component of FH will emerge at D with one of the components of AB, and one component of AB and one component of EG will emerge at C. Hence from every point of the upper surface of the plate there will emerge two rays and these rays will have travelled through different paths in the plate with different velocities and will have their vibrations at right angles to each other.

When these doubly refracted rays come to the analyzer, whose plane of vibration is A′A, they cannot get through vibrating in their present directions, but components of these rays, such as ot and os, can get through vibrating parallel to the plane A′A.

Hence we have two series of rays coming to the eye, polarized in the same plane, but one set slightly in advance of the other. These rays will “interfere” and produce some interference or polarization color.[47] In using white light whenever one of two light rays of the same color has suffered a “retardation” of just one wave-length (or even multiple thereof) the color will be extinguished; and when the “retardation” is one half wave-length (or even multiple thereof) the color will be intensified. Therefore, some tints will be extinguished and others intensified, the 29combination resulting in the production of some definite interference color. Of course in the case of monochromatic light the thickness of the section may be such that “destructive interference” takes place producing no color (darkness).

Now suppose the stage to be rotated until the section cdef takes the position c′d′e′f′. The section will be found to be dark and no interference color will be seen. This is due to the fact that the directions of vibration in the section are parallel to the planes of vibration of the crossed nicols, consequently the light passes through the section still vibrating parallel to the plane PP′ of the polarizer and is all cut out by the analyzer. Darkness will occur every 90° and therefore four times during a complete rotation of the stage. The interference color is also observed to vary in intensity, but not in color, and to be at its maximum 45° from the positions of darkness.

Sections of uniaxial crystals at right angles to the optic axis act like isotropic substances and remain dark during a complete rotation of the stage. In the biaxial crystals, a section at right angles to an “optic axis” shows uniform illumination[48] which does not change as the stage is rotated.

The only way to find out whether sections that remain dark are isotropic, or uniaxial at right angles to an optic axis, is to test them with convergent light as described later, see p. 40.

Interference Colors. The interference color shown by any mineral section depends on three factors: 1° the strength of the double refraction (γ − α = the difference between the refractive indices of the slowest and fastest rays); 2° the position of the section in the crystal; 3° the thickness of the crystal section.

To eliminate, so far as possible, the variation due to the optical orientation of the section, care must always be taken to obtain the maximum interference color given by the different sections of the same mineral in the rock section. Sections giving the maximum color are those parallel to the ć axis in uniaxial minerals and those parallel to the axial plane in biaxial minerals.[49] Hence such sections in convergent light never show the emergence of an optic axis or a bisectrix; and furthermore, other clues, such as crystal 30outlines, cleavage, pleochroism, etc., may help to indicate the favorable section.

The influence of the thickness of the section is also important and must be considered. The interference color will rise in the scale (be higher in order) as the section becomes thicker. Methods of obtaining the thickness of a section are given on pp. 35 and 36. When reference is made to definite interference colors the mineral section is supposed to have a thickness of 0.03 mm. and to be such as to give the maximum color; and all mineral sections in a rock section are considered to have a uniform thickness.

With these precautions in mind the interference colors indicate the strength of the double refraction as follows:[50] The colors of minerals with very weak double refraction vary from a bluish-gray to a grayish-white. As the strength of the double refraction increases the colors become the very intense bright tints of the spectrum, yellow, red, blue, green, etc., called the first and second order colors. As the strength of the double refraction still increases the colors pass through the tints of the spectrum in sequence (called orders), becoming paler until finally, when the double refraction is very strong, the colors become the neutral, almost colorless tints of the higher orders. The eye must be trained to appreciate the colors of different orders, and the student is advised to practice with mineral sections, of known strength of double refraction, and compare the resulting interference colors with a color chart,[51] or use the interference color diagram at the end of the book. A convenient test can be made with a one fourth undulation mica plate to distinguish between the white of the 1° order and the practically white very high order tint. Introduce the mica plate in the slot k, Fig. 2, and the effect will be to produce a marked change in the color of the 1° order, while no change will be observed in the high order color.

The exact order of the color can be determined by the use of a quartz wedge, as described on p. 35.

Abnormal Interference Colors[52] may be brought about in several 31ways. In white light strong absorption of part of the light components may not only alter the color of the mineral but also modify the interference color. The double refraction may be nearly zero for light of a particular color so that the mineral is isotropic for that color, resulting in a change in the interference color, as for example the indigo of melilite, which is nearly isotropic for yellow light. In biaxial minerals the axial angle may be zero for light of a particular color, resulting also in a modification of the interference color, as the blue in penninite in sections ⟂ Bxa. When the bisectrices are much dispersed there will be no position of darkness between crossed nicols in white light.

Extinction and Extinction Angles. When the section, see Fig. 16, is in such a position that its directions of vibration are parallel to the planes of vibration of the nicols, no light can pass through the analyzer, and the section is dark. Hence the light is extinguished and this phenomenon is called extinction.

Extinction is said to be parallel or symmetrical when the directions of vibration are parallel to any crystallographic lines or directions, or bisect the angles between these lines. The crystallographic lines or directions may be either cleavages or the similar boundaries of idiomorphic crystals.

This kind of extinction is shown by all sections of tetragonal and hexagonal crystals, by all sections parallel to the crystal axes in orthorhombic crystals and also by the sections parallel to the ƃ axis in monoclinic crystals.

When the extinction is not symmetrical it is called oblique, and is shown by all sections of monoclinic crystals (except those parallel to the ƃ axis) and triclinic crystals.

Extinction which does not take place over the whole of the section of a single crystal at the same moment, but passes over the section like a dark wave or shadow, is said to be “wavy”; and indicates that the crystal has been subjected to mechanical forces producing a change in the position of the directions of vibration in different parts of the crystal, see Fig. 7.

The angle between a direction of vibration in the section and some known crystallographic direction (as a cleavage or crystal outline) is called an extinction angle, and is measured in the following way: Find the positions of the directions of vibration in the 32section, which must be parallel to the cross-wires when extinction takes place. Note the reading on the graduated circle of the stage, then remove the upper nicol, in order to get a more distinct view of the field, and rotate the stage until you bring some known crystallographic line into parallel position with the cross-wire selected as a reference line. Take the reading of the graduated circle again, and the difference between these two readings will be the extinction angle.

It can readily be seen that depending on which way the section is rotated, either a small or a large extinction angle will be obtained, the two angles being complements of each other. The extinction angle generally recorded is that between the nearest direction of vibration and the vertical axis ć.

In monoclinic minerals the maximum value of the extinction angle (the angle of real value in distinguishing the mineral) can only be obtained from a section parallel to the clino pinacoid (010); but in practice sufficiently accurate results can generally be obtained by measuring the extinction angles of all sections of the same mineral, which seem to be about parallel to the vertical axis ć, and then taking the maximum value obtained. Amphibole and pyroxene can easily be distinguished in this way.

Extinction is generally tested for by revolving the stage, carrying the section, until darkness is observed. The principal difficulty, however, is caused by the eye failing to appreciate the position of maximum darkness. Hence it is better to revolve the stage until the section just becomes dark (or fades out) and then revolve further until the section just begins to lighten up again. The mean of the readings, in these two positions, will be the one to use.

A gypsum test-plate, so prepared as to give some definite interference color, as red of the 1° order, may be introduced between the two nicols, and the section revolved until this color is exactly matched. This perfect matching of color is only possible when the directions of vibration of the section are exactly parallel to the planes of vibration of the nicols, as otherwise some interference color would be produced by the section and the true color of the test-plate would not appear. The most favorable condition is when the section is colorless and only covers a part of the field 33of view, as then the rest of the field shows the color of the test-plate and the exact matching of color is an easy matter. This method of testing can be employed to recognize the very weak double refraction of some minerals, whose interference colors are such dark grays as not to be noticed without this test. After the test-plate has been introduced, some slight variation in the color will be observed when the stage carrying the doubly refracting section is rotated. There are other methods[53] for locating these directions of vibration. They depend generally on substituting changes of color for degrees of darkness or on changes in interference figures, and consist in the use of color test-plates or Klein’s quartz-plate, or of special oculars prepared by