Method of Testing for the Vibration Directions of the Faster and Slower Rays, a′ and c′, in a Mineral Section.

A mica or gypsum plate can be used to make this test, the directions of vibration of the faster and slower rays on these plates being known and marked.[54]

The crystal section to be tested is placed on the rotating stage, between crossed nicols, and turned to the position of extinction, when these directions of vibration will be parallel to the cross-wires in the eye-piece. The section is then turned 45°, when the interference color will be at its maximum, and these directions of vibration will make angles of 45° with the planes of vibration of the nicols and the cross-wires in the eye-piece.

Now introduce[55] the test-plate, between the section and the analyzer, 34so that its known directions of vibration also make angles of 45° with the cross-wires in the eye-piece.

When the test-plate is introduced a new interference color will be noticed which is either higher or lower in the color scale[56] than the original interference color of the mineral section. When the known directions of vibration of the test-plate are superposed over corresponding directions in the mineral section, the effect is to thicken the section and the interference color rises in the scale.

When the directions of vibration of the test-plate are superposed over directions of vibration in the mineral section which are not corresponding, the effect is to thin the section and the interference color sinks in the scale.

For minerals which have very strong double refraction, as zircons, so that the interference colors are of the higher orders, it is advisable to use the method of testing with a quartz wedge.[57]

If a wedge is inserted between crossed nicols and its c direction inclined at 45° to the planes of vibration of the nicols, then successive interference colors will be seen commencing with the gray of the first order and passing through the colors as shown by a color chart. If now the crystal section lies with its vibration directions also in the diagonal position, the color of any portion of the quartz wedge will be changed where it covers the section, the new color being that of a thicker part of the wedge if the c direction in the section lies under the c direction of the wedge. Also where the wedge overlaps the section the displacement of the color fringes in the section will be towards the thin edge of the wedge. On the other hand the new color will be that of a thinner part of the wedge when the a direction in the section lies under the c direction of the wedge. In this case the displacement of the color fringes will be towards the thick part of the wedge.

This method is very convenient when the crystal section has in 35any place sloping edges, showing prismatic color fringes. The movement of these fringes (as previously described) is towards the thin edge of the wedge when the vibration directions correspond and away from this edge when they do not correspond.

If the wedge when inserted finally “compensates” the color of the crystal section (i. e., practically produces an absence of color, darkness), then the a in this section must lie under the c in the wedge, as the effect of the wedge has been to continually thin the section.
Determination of Order of Interference Color.

This can be determined by use of a quartz wedge or a v. Federow mica wedge.[58] Have the vibration directions of the given section in the diagonal position, then gradually insert the wedge between the crossed nicols so that the corresponding vibration directions in the section and wedge are crossed, that is so that the colors are run down until finally dark gray or black is obtained. Count the number of times the original interference color reappears, if n times, then the color is a red, blue, green, etc., of n + 1 order.[59]

It is often easier to insert the wedge until compensation of the color is obtained; then as the wedge is pulled out the direct count of the recurrence of the original color will give the order of that color.
Method of Measuring the Strength of the Double Refraction by von Federow Mica Wedge.[60]

“The wedge[61] consists of fifteen superposed quarter undulation mica plates, each about two mm. shorter than the one beneath it and with their directions of vibration parallel. The series is mounted on a strip of glass and covered with a cover-glass.

The wave-length of a middle color may be taken as 560 μμ (millionths of a millimeter); hence each quarter undulation mica plate may be considered to possess a phase difference or retardation of 140 μμ. If, then, between the polarizer and analyzer we insert the mica wedge, so that its direction of vibration of the 36slower ray, c, is at right angles to that of the mineral under examination, we subtract from the phase difference of the mineral an amount equal to n times 140 μμ, in which n represents the number of superposed mica plates in the field. When the mineral appears dark the value evidently corresponds closely to the phase difference of the mineral.[62]

From the expression Δ = eX, in which Δ is the phase difference or retardation, X the double refraction, and e the thickness in millionths of millimeters, the thickness can be deduced when the double refraction is known or vice versa. If a mineral of known double refraction can be found in the section near the mineral under investigation,[63] the double refraction of the latter can be deduced by measuring the phase difference of the known mineral, whence e results, and this substituted in the above formula yields X.”
Method of Determining Minerals and Thickness of Section, by Use of Table of Double Refraction (Maximum) and Diagram.[64]

Select some easily recognized mineral in the rock section and note the maximum interference color given by any of its sections.[65] The strength of the double refraction of this mineral being known, look up on the diagram the diagonal line corresponding to this double refraction and follow along this line toward the left hand lower corner until the observed interference color is reached, when the horizontal line will indicate the thickness of the section. The thickness is given in hundredths of millimeters. Then in the case of the unknown mineral pick out the section giving the highest interference color and carry along the same horizontal line until this new color is located,[66] then pass up to the right along the diagonal line to the numbers indicating the strength of the double 37refraction of the unknown mineral. Turn to the table where the minerals will be found having about this strength of double refraction.

Example: In a section of granite (biotite-granite) a grain of quartz was selected, which gave the brightest color. This color was a bright yellowish white and the known double refraction of quartz is 0.009. Following down on this diagonal line until the interference color was reached it was seen that the thickness of the section was about 0.03 mm. (a very thin section). The section of the undetermined mineral, giving the highest order color, showed a bright 2° order purple-blue. Passing along the 0.03 horizontal line until this color was reached and then up along the diagonal line, it was seen that the double refraction of this mineral must be about 0.04. The table gives muscovite and ægerite as having about this double refraction. The mineral was proved to be muscovite by its absence of color and relief and by the characteristic cleavage and parallel extinction.